{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0
{\fonttbl
{\f0\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Arial;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Dingbats;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Symbol;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Courier New;}}
{\colortbl
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\stylesheet
{\s1\fi-430\li720\sbasedon29\snext29Contents 1;}
{\s2\fi-430\li1440\sbasedon29\snext29Contents 2;}
{\s3\fi-430\li2160\sbasedon29\snext29Contents 3;}
{\s8\fi-430\li720\sbasedon29Lower Roman List;}
{\s5\tx431\sbasedon25\snext29Numbered Heading 1;}
{\s6\tx431\sbasedon26\snext29Numbered Heading 2;}
{\s7\fi-430\li720Square List;}
{\*\cs11\sbasedon29Endnote Text;}
{\s4\fi-430\li2880\sbasedon29\snext29Contents 4;}
{\s9\fi-430\li720Diamond List;}
{\s10\fi-430\li720Numbered List;}
{\*\cs12\fs20\superEndnote Reference;}
{\s13\fi-430\li720Triangle List;}
{\s14\tx431\sbasedon27\snext29Numbered Heading 3;}
{\s15\fi-430\li720Dashed List;}
{\s16\fi-430\li720\sbasedon10Upper Roman List;}
{\s17\sb440\sa60\f1\fs24\b\sbasedon29\snext29Heading 4;}
{\s18\fi-430\li720Heart List;}
{\s35\fi-430\li720Box List;}
{\*\cs20\fs20Reference;}
{\s21\fi-430\li720\sbasedon10Upper Case List;}
{\s22\fi-430\li720Bullet List;}
{\s23\fi-430\li720Hand List;}
{\*\cs24\fs20\sbasedon29Footnote Text;}
{\s25\sb440\sa60\f1\fs34\b\sbasedon29\snext29Heading 1;}
{\s26\sb440\sa60\f1\fs28\b\sbasedon29\snext29Heading 2;}
{\s19\qc\sb240\sa119\f1\fs32\b\sbasedon29\snext29Contents Header;}
{\s28\fi-430\li720Tick List;}
{\s27\sb440\sa60\f1\fs24\b\sbasedon29\snext29Heading 3;}
{\s30\fi-430\li720\sbasedon10Lower Case List;}
{\s31\li1440\ri1440\sa119\sbasedon29Block Text;}
{\s37\f4\sbasedon29Plain Text;}
{\s33\tx1584\sbasedon5\snext29Section Heading;}
{\s34\fi-430\li720Implies List;}
{\s29\f0\fs24Normal;}
{\s36\fi-430\li720Star List;}
{\*\cs32\fs20\superFootnote Reference;}
{\s38\tx1584\sbasedon5\snext29Chapter Heading;}}
\kerning0\cf0\ftnbj\fet2\ftnstart1\ftnnar\aftnnar\ftnstart1\aftnstart1\aenddoc\revprop3{\info\uc1}\deftab720\viewkind1\paperw11905\paperh16837\margl1440\margr1440\widowctrl
\sectd\sbknone\colsx360\headery0\footery0\pgncont\ltrsect
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\b\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch GPS Collar required specs:}{\f0\fs24\b\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 1. Weight: all inclusive (Collar and GPS unit) : 0.180 kg (180g) max (for jackal). (More robust and heavier for leopard / cheetah / large dogs - not more than 5% of body weight and preferably lighter). (If it absolutely must, up to 250g)}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 2. At least 1 GPS point per hour recorded.}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 3. Store at least 2160 data points (3 months\uc1\u8217\'92 data).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 4. Working life at least 1 year before drop-off (either ultra-efficient battery & electronics or with solar panel, thermo-electrical effect or kinetic/piezoelectric effect or combination of these in collar - the method used should take into account the possibility of nocturnal animals (sleeping during the day)).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch   5. Collar must have drop-off ability (either on radio signal, or automatically after certain period, or before battery too low to trigger drop-off).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 6. Ability to download data while collar still on animal (either via base stations which automatically data from collar when within range, or via cell phone / satellite, or with radio transmitter and when researcher within range, on prompt from \uc1\u8220\'93receiving\uc1\u8221\'94 device).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch   7. Collar itself robust enough not to break and fall off and also without projections (e.g. loose antenna) that could catch on plants, fences etc. }{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 8. Programmable settings. (GPS recording frequency etc. should be changeable, preferably from the \uc1\u8220\'93base station"/data download device).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch   9. Download device must be able to communicate with computer (ethernet/wireless/bluetooth/usb).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 10. For cheetahs: accelerometer that takes extra GPS point at beginning of acceleration and after deceleration (might even work with leopards and wild dogs as well).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\b\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Nice to haves:}{\f0\fs24\b\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 1. If no satellites can be found (e.g. animal underground), retry twice at 5 min intervals, then stop trying).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 2. Even if not necessary for download (cf. requirement 6), radio transmission so that animals can be actively tracked with directional antenna on receiving device (or any other method by which collared animal could be found by researcher).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 3. Some measurement of activity, pulse, temperature, swallowing etc. and recording these with GPS data (possibly not needed if we have 10 above).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 4. Ability to automatically adjust to neck size. I.e. if put on young animal expand as animal grow. (Unlikely when combined with requirement 7 above).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 5. As far as possible using existing components and cheaper than current GPS collars (currently these costs about R17000-00 each).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 6. Possibility to \uc1\u8220\'93shut down\uc1\u8221\'94 when animal sleeps and only boots up again when animal wakes up (using Nice to have feature 3).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 7. Possibility to programmatically change number and times of GPS readings (using USB/wireless/bluetooth?) - especially with regards to point 10 above.}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sl240\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch 8. Have base station on small radio-controlled (helium-baloon) solar-powered \uc1\u8220\'93airship\uc1\u8221\'94 that can be anchored to stay stationary or controlled to follow animal from air (e.g. in thick bush where researcher can not physically come close enough to collared animal to download data, but can control base station to get close enough).}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}7.}{\f0\fs24\lang2057{\*\listtag0}\par}}