{\rtf1\ansi
\deff0\deflang1024\uc1
{\fonttbl
{\f0\fnil\fcharset0Times;}
}
{\colortbl
;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;
}
{\stylesheet
{\fs20\snext0Normal;}
{\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\qc\f0\fs40\b\sbasedon0\snext0part;}
{\s2\keepn\li0\sb240\sa60\ql\f0\fs40\b\sbasedon0\snext0heading 1;}
{\s3\keepn\sb240\sa60\ql\f0\fs32\b\sbasedon0\snext0heading 2;}
{\s4\keepn\sb240\sa60\ql\f0\fs32\b\sbasedon0\snext0heading 3;}
{\s5\keepn\sb240\sa60\ql\f0\fs24\b\sbasedon0\snext0heading 4;}
{\s6\keepn\sb240\sa60\ql\f0\fs24\b\sbasedon0\snext0heading 5;}
{\s7\keepn\sb240\sa60\ql\f0\fs24\b\sbasedon0\snext0heading 6;}
}
{\*\generator Ted 2.23, Feb 4, 2013 (http://www.nllgg.nl/Ted);}
{\info
{\title Original file was ThesisOutline.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 1.9.19 (released Nov 20 2007) on Sat Nov 16 11:34:56 2013}
{\revtim\yr2013\mo11\dy16\hr11\min43\sec58}
}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl739\margr739\margt569\margb739\widowctrl
\fet0\aftntj
\sectd
{\footer\pard\plain
\pard\qc\plain\fs20{\field{\*\fldinst{PAGE}}{\fldrslt{1}}}
\par}
{\footerr\pard\plain
\pard\qc\plain\fs20{\field{\*\fldinst{PAGE}}{\fldrslt{1}}}
\par}
\pard\s5\qj\plain\par
\pard\qc\plain\fs30Human-predator conflict on Namibian farmlands: an 
ecosystem approach\par
\fs24\par
\par
Chavoux Luyt\par
\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\b Abstract\par
\pard\li1024\ri1024\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain Human-wildlife conflict is a 
worldwide and increasingly important problem. In the past most 
"solutions" to this conflict has been either from an agricultural 
perspective or from a conservation perspective. However, because the 
goals of these two perspectives are seldom the same, there has been 
frustratingly little progress in preventing human-wildlife conflict. 
The "Farming with Predators"project attempts to cross this divide by 
seeking solutions that are both ecologically and agriculturally 
sustainable. In Northern Namibia four predator species are widely 
considered as responsible for most livestock losses, leopards (\i
Panthera pardus\i0), cheetahs (\i Acinonyx jubatus\i0), caracals (\i
Felis caracal\i0) and blackjacked jackals (\i Canis mesomelas)\i0. Two 
of these predator species, are classified as vulnerable (\i Acinonyx 
jubatus\i0) and near-threatened (\i Panthera pardus\i0) in the IUCN Red 
List of Threathened species. A recent increase in leopard numbers and a 
decrease in cheetahs have been reported by various farmers in North 
Central Namibia, but needs to be verified. Camera trap data will be 
used and compared with data from a previous camera trap survey by the 
Cheetah Conservation Fund (CFC) for this purpose. Possible causes for 
this shift, if real, might be important for the future survival of 
cheetahs on farmland, where 90% of Namibia's cheetahs currently occur. 
The spatial interaction between the four main "problem predators" on 
Namibian farmlands, will be investigated to with the specific goals of 
investigating the possible direct influence of leopards on cheetah 
spatial or temporal behaviour and for evidence of meso-predator release 
where leopards or cheetahs have been removed from an area. This will be 
done using a combination of camera traps, physical tracking with a 
Cybertracker GPS device, possibly GPS collars, and faecal analysis. A 
cost-benefit analysis of the current anti-predation measures used by 
Namibian farmers will also be done using data from both general surveys 
and detailed monthly data. The practical implications of these data for 
sustainable farming and persistence of functioning ecosystems on 
farmlands will be discussed as well as its wider application in 
diminishing human-wildlife conflict.\par
\pard\s1\keepn\ri1024\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\plain\fs40\b\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\fs40\b Part I\par
Chapter 1: General Intro\par
\fs28Literature review on human-wildlife conflict worldwide, the 
different kinds of mitigating methods, their use in Southern Africa and 
their advantages and disadvantages in the Namibian context.\par
\pard\s6\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\plain  \b Human-wildlife 
conflict is an increasing and worldwide problem (Messmer, 2000; Treves 
and Karanth, 2003), even though a variety of mitigating methods have 
been proposed (Nyhus et\'a0al., 2003; Linnell et\'a0al., 1996; Shivik, 
2004; Daly et\'a0al., 2006; Shivik, 2006). These include proactive 
methods to prevent the conflict (Daly et\'a0al., 2006; Shivik, 2006), 
methods that increase the value of the wildlife species to offset the 
costs of living with wildlife (e.g. regulated harvest of leopard in 
Uganda [Treves and Karanth, 2003], wildlife property rights on Namibian 
farmlands [McGranahan, 2008], eco-tourism, etc.), and reactive methods 
including compensation and removal of problem animals after-the-fact. 
\par
\b0  \b On Namibian farmlands, most human-wildlife conflict involve 
predators, since livestock and game farming are the main economic 
activities on about 69% of Namibia (with 16% of Namibia being true 
desert and unsuitable for any agricultural activities, Marker, 2002). 
The major predators perceived as a threat to their livelihoods by 
livestock and game farmers in Northern Namibia, are leopards (\i
Panthera pardus\i0), cheetahs (\i Acinonyx jubatus\i0), caracals (\i
Felis caracal\i0) and blackjacked jackals (\i Canis mesomelas)\i0  (cf. 
Stein, 2008). Two of these predator species, are classified as 
vulnerable (\i Acinonyx jubatus\i0, Durant et\'a0al., 2008) and 
near-threatened (\i Panthera pardus,\i0  Henschel et\'a0al., 2008) by 
the IUCN. In addition, because of intra-guild hostility with larger 
predators like lions and spotted hyaena, their large home range 
requirements, as well as their susceptibility to anthrax, conserved 
areas alone are unlikely to ensure the survival of Namibian cheetahs 
(cf. Lindeque et\'a0al., 1998). Human-wildlife conflict involving 
lions, elephants and spotted hyaenas is usually caused by nonresident 
populations moving onto farmlands from a source population in a 
conserved area. By contrast, 90% of surviving cheetahs in Namibia are 
found on farmlands outside formally conserved areas and direct killing 
by humans and the resulting change in population demographics have been 
identified as the major cause of cheetah mortality on Namibian 
farmlands (Marker et\'a0al., 2003). Persecution by humans is also one 
of the major threats to leopards in Africa (Henschel et\'a0al., 2008). 
However, recent reports from farmers (pers. comm. Francois Kok, Rolf 
Ritter and others) suggest that there has been an increase in leopard 
numbers on many farms and a simultaneous decrease in cheetah numbers. 
If this effect is real, it could have important implications for the 
survival of cheetahs, since inter-specific competition with larger 
predators are one of the threats to long-term cheetah survival (Durant 
et\'a0al., 2008). This shift in species composition could be the result 
of direct lethal confrontation between leopards and cheetahs, "fear and 
loathing" (\i sensu\i0  Ritchie and Johnson, 2009) resulting in 
cheetahs avoiding areas with high leopard density, habitat changes 
caused by bush encroachment, a change in available prey species, a 
disproportionate number of cheetahs killed by humans compared to 
leopards, or other currently unknown reasons. \par
\b0  \b While leopards and cheetahs can prey on large livestock (cattle 
calves and horse or donkey foals), blackjacked jackals are perceived as 
the biggest problem by farmers with small livestock, while caracals are 
not considered as important on most North Central Namibian farms 
(Stein, 2008). By contrast, in Southern Namibia as well as small 
livestock areas of South Africa, caracals are second in importance to 
blackjacked jackal as livestock predator (Griffin, 1998; Daly et\'a0
al., 2006; Snow, 2009). This is also true in some communal farming 
areas of North Central Namibia, where sheep and goats form a larger 
portion of the livestock (GWC survey, 2012).\par
\b0  \b Meso-predator release has been shown in America for coyotes as 
a result of the loss of wolves, cougars or grizzly bears (Estes et\'a0
al., 2011). It follows that one of the major reasons for the increasing 
problems with jackals and caracals could be meso-predator release 
(Beinart, 1998). It is known that leopards will kill and eat 
blackjacked jackals (Bothma and Le Riche, 1994), and that caracals and 
jackals will occasionally kill each other's young, but the extend and 
importance of these interactions have not been studied in enough detail 
to know whether meso-predator release could be a significant reason for 
the reported increase in livestock depredation by these meso-predator 
species. If meso-predator release plays a role in Namibian eco-sytems, 
it will have important implications for predator management on 
farmlands.\par
\b0  \b Predators form an important part of any ecosystem and it has 
been suggested that most ecosystems are actually top-down controlled 
(Estes et\'a0al., 2011) and therefore susceptible to trophic cascades 
when top-level predators are removed. It follows that an ecosystem 
without its full complement of predators might not be able to deliver 
ecosystem services sustainably, in addition to the wider loss in 
biodiversity. One of the major reasons for farmer-predator conflict is 
that although everyone benefits from these ecosystem services, it is 
the farmers who have to bear the brunt of the costs. In a study done 
for the Red meat Producers Organisation the total annual costs of 
livestock depredation for small livestock farmers in South Africa was 
estimated as R 1 390 453 062 (Van Niekerk, 2010). For this reason, it 
is assumed that the methods most likely to decrease conflict between 
farmers and predators, are those that will maximise the benefits and 
minimise the costs of predators on the land.\par
\b0  \b While the spatial ecology of Namibian cheetahs (Marker et\'a0
al., 2008), leopards (Marker and Dickman, 2005a; Stein et\'a0al., 2011) 
and caracals (Marker and Dickman, 2005b) have been studied, the extend 
and importance of the spatial interaction between these predator 
species is still relatively unknown. Since intra-guild interactions can 
have a huge impact on ecosystems (Sinclair et\'a0al., 2003; Estes et\'a0
al., 2011), and the current human-predator conflict might largely be 
the result of changes in the predator species composition on farmland 
ecosystems (Beinart, 1998; Daly et\'a0al., 2006; Ritchie and Johnson, 
2009), a better understanding of these interactions could lead to both 
better conservation and less human-wildlife conflict.\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain  \page
\fs40\b Part II\par
Chapter 2: Methodologies\par
\fs28Details of study site (everything relevant to all chapters)\par
\pard\fi-300\li600\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain  \'b7\tab Literature 
review \par
\'b7\tab Farmer survey \par
\'b7\tab Camera trap survey \par
\'b7\tab Analysis of historical data \par
\'b7\tab Should there be any new methods or just use already existing 
methods?  \par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\pagebb\plain\fs40\b Part III
\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\fs40\b Chapter 3: 
Farmer surveys\par
\pard\s1\keepn\fi-240\li570\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\plain\fs40\b\fs24
\b0\'b7\tab Sets up current situation... \par
\pard\fi-300\li600\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab General survey 
(as many farmers as possible):\par
\pard\fi-300\li1200\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab Non-drought (2 
years ago) vs. drought (Now)?  \par
\'b7\tab Compare stocking levels / losses (and game numbers) of above 
two periods. \par
\'b7\tab Compare predator numbers (will they still have records from 2 
years ago? ) \par
\pard\fi-300\li600\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab Monthly survey 
(from willing farmers with good record-keeping)\par
\pard\fi-300\li1200\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab Costs of each 
method used \par
\'b7\tab Livestock losses to predators \par
\'b7\tab Livestock losses to other factors \par
\'b7\tab Changes in livestock numbers (calves/lambs/kids) - used to 
determine calving and weaning %. \par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\pagebb\plain\fs40\b Part IV
\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\fs40\b Chapter 4: 
Camera trap survey (+ historical GPS data? )\par
\pard\s1\keepn\fi-270\li600\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\plain\fs40\b\fs24
\b0\'b7\tab Which predator and prey species in area?  Presence-absence.
\par
\pard\fi-300\li600\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab How many 
individual predators?  Density estimates. \par
\'b7\tab Habitat use -> Habitat components!  \par
\'b7\tab Leopard-Cheetah fluctuation: Perception (From Chapter 3? ), 
Reality (Cam. trap data) and Causes (Behavioural models). \par
\'b7\tab Historical data: What do we have?  How many individuals?  What 
areas?  How long per individual?  Data point frequency?  What species?  
Did the tagging periods (and place) overlap with the previous camera 
trap surveys?  What data has already been published and what can still 
be used?  \par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\pagebb\plain\fs40\b Part V
\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\fs40\b Chapter 5: Cost 
benefit analysis\par
\pard\s1\keepn\fi-285\li615\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\plain\'b7\tab From 
monthly farmer data (Chapter 3). \par
\pard\fi-300\li600\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab Include other 
methods identified in lit. review for discussion. \par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\pagebb\plain\fs40\b Part VI
\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\fs40\b Chapter 6: Roll 
out wider into Africa?  Habitat Model application to management.\par
\pard\s1\keepn\fi-210\li540\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\plain\fs40\b\fs24
\b0\'b7\tab Commercial vs communal: The results might not be applicable 
in most of Africa. \par
\pard\fi-300\li600\sb50\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain\'b7\tab How cheetahs 
(other predators? ) used their territories. Determining factors 
(Dempster-Shafer model? ). \par
\'b7\tab Extrapolate: Where should they be?  Does that correlate to 
conservancies/communal land etc. ?  \par
\'b7\tab Decision support system for farmers. \par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\pagebb\plain\fs40\b Part VII
\par
\pard\s1\keepn\sb240\sa60\sl240\slmult1\qc\plain\fs40\b Chapter 7: 
General discussion\par
\fs32\par
\pard\sb120\sl240\slmult1\qj\pagebb\plain\fs32\b References\par
\pard\fi-450\li450\sb60\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain W.\'a0Beinart. The Night 
of the Jackal: Sheep, Pastures and Predators in the Cape. \i Past & 
Present\i0, 158:172\'ad206, February 1998.\par
\pard\fi-450\li450\sl240\slmult1\qj\plain J.du\'a0P. Bothma and E.A.N 
Le Riche. Scat analysis and aspects of defecation in Northern Cape 
leopards. \i South African Journal of Wildlife Research\i0, 24 
(1/2):21\'ad26, June 1994.\par
B.\'a0Daly, H.\'a0Davies-Mostert, W.\'a0Davies-Mostert, S.\'a0Evans, 
Y.\'a0Friedmann, N.\'a0King, T.\'a0Snow, and H.\'a0Stadler, editors. \i  
Prevention is the Cure. Proceedings of a workshop on holistic 
management of human-wildlife conflict in the agricultural sector of 
South Africa.\i0, April 2006. Endangered Wildlife Trust.\par
S.M. Durant, L.L. Marker, N.\'a0Purchase, F.\'a0Belbachir, L.\'a0
Hunter, C.\'a0Packer, C.\'a0Breitenmoser-Wursten, E.A. Sogbohossou, and 
H.\'a0Bauer. Acinonyx jubatus. In IUCN, editor, \i IUCN Red List of 
Threatened Species. Version 2013.1. <www.iucnredlist.org>. Downloaded 
on 23 July 2013.\i0  IUCN, 2008.\par
J.A. Estes, J.\'a0Terborgh, J.S. Brashares, M.E. Power, J.\'a0Berger, 
W.J. Bond, S.R. Carpenter, Essington T.E., R.D. Holt, J.B.C. Jackson, 
R.J. Marquis, L.\'a0Oksanen, T.\'a0Oksanen, R.T. Paine, E.K. Pikitch, 
W.J. Ripple, S.A. Sandin, M.\'a0Scheffer, T.W. Schoener, J.B. Shurin, 
A.R.E. Sinclair, M.E. Soul\'e9, R.\'a0Virtanen, and D.A. Wardle. 
Trophic Downgrading of Planet Earth. \i Science\i0, 333(6040):301\'ad306, 
July 2011.\par
M.\'a0Griffin. The species diversity, distribution and conservation of 
Namibian mammals. \i Biodiversity and Conservation\i0, 7:483\'ad494, 
1998.\par
P.\'a0Henschel, L.\'a0Hunter, U.\'a0Breitenmoser, N.\'a0Purchase, C.\'a0
Packer, I.\'a0Khorozyan, H.\'a0Bauer, L.L. Marker, E.A. Sogbohossou, 
and C.\'a0Breitenmoser-Wursten. Panthera pardus. In IUCN, editor, \i
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2013.1. 
<www.iucnredlist.org>. Downloaded on 23 July 2013.\i0  IUCN, 2008.\par
P.M. Lindeque, K.\'a0Nowell, T.\'a0Preisser, C.\'a0Brian, and P.C.B. 
Turnbull.  Anthrax in wild cheetahs in the Etosha NP, Namibia. In \i
ARC- Onderstepoort OIE International Congress, 9-15 August 1998.\i0, 
pages 9\'ad15, August 1998.\par
J.D.C. Linnell, M.E. Smith, J.\'a0Odden, J.E. Swenson, and P.\'a0
Kaczensky. Carnivores and sheep farming in Norway. 4. Strategies for 
the reduction of carnivore - livestock - conflicts: a review. Technical 
report, Norsk Institutt for Naturforskning, November 1996.\par
L.L. Marker. \i Aspects of Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) Biology, Ecology 
and Conservation Strategies on Namibian Farmlands\i0. PhD thesis, 
University of Oxford, September 2002.\par
L.L. Marker and A.J. Dickman. Factors affecting leopard (Panthera 
pardus) spatial ecology, with particular reference to Namibian 
farmlands. \i South African Journal of Wildlife Research\i0, 35 
(2):105\'ad115, October 2005a.\par
L.L. Marker and A.J. Dickman. Notes on the spatial ecology of caracals 
(FeIis caracal), with particular reference to Namibian farmlands. \i
African Journal of Ecology\i0, 43:73\'ad76, 2005b.\par
L.L. Marker, A.J. Dickman, R.M. Jeo, M.G.L. Mills, and D.W. Macdonald. 
Demography of the Namibian cheetah, Acinonyx jubatus jubatus. \i
Biological Conservation\i0, 114:413\'ad425, 2003.\par
L.L. Marker, A.J. Dickman, M.G.L. Mills, R.M. Jeo, and D.W. Macdonald. 
Spatial ecology of cheetahs on north-central Namibian farmlands. \i
Journal of Zoology\i0, 274:226\'ad238, 2008.\par
D.A. McGranahan. Managing private, commercial rangelands for 
agricultural production and wildlife diversity in Namibia and Zambia. \i
Biodiversity and Conservation\i0, 17(8): 1965\'ad1977, July 2008. 
10.1007/s10531-008-9339-y.\par
T.A. Messmer. The emergence of human-wildlife conflict management: 
turning challenges into opportunities. \i International 
Biodeterioration & Biodegradation\i0, 45: 97\'ad102, 2000.\par
P.J. Nyhus, H.\'a0Fischer, F.\'a0Madden, and S.\'a0Osofsky. Taking the 
bite out of wildlife damage : The challenges of wildlife compensation 
schemes. \i Conservation in Practice\i0, 4:37\'ad40, 2003.\par
E.\'a0G. Ritchie and C.\'a0N. Johnson. Predator interactions, 
mesopredator release and biodiversity conservation. \i Ecology Letters
\i0, 12:982\'ad998, 2009.\par
J.A. Shivik. Non-lethal Alternatives for Predation Management. \i Sheep 
& Goat Research Journal\i0, 19:64\'ad71, 2004.\par
J.A. Shivik. Tools for the Edge: Whats New for Conserving Carnivores. \i
BioScience\i0, 56(3):253\'ad259, March 2006.\par
A.R.E. Sinclair, S.\'a0Mduma, and J.S. Brashares. Patterns of predation 
in a diverse predator\'adprey system. \i Nature\i0, 425:288\'ad290, 
2003.\par
T.V. Snow. A Systems-Thinking Based Evaluation of Predator Conflict 
Management on Selected South African Farms. Master's thesis, University 
of KwaZulu-Natal, 2009.\par
A.B. Stein. \i Ecology and conservation of the leopard (Panthera pardus 
Linnaeus 1758) in Northcentral Namibia\i0. PhD thesis, University of 
Massachusetts Amherst, May 2008.\par
A.B. Stein, T.K. Fuller, S.\'a0DeStefano, and L.L. Marker. Leopard 
population and home range estimates in north-central Namibia. \i African 
Journal of Ecology\i0, 49:383\'ad387, 2011.\par
A.\'a0Treves and K.U. Karanth. Human-Carnivore Conflict and 
Perspectives on Carnivore Management Worldwide. \i Conservation Biology
\i0, 17(6):1491\'ad1499, December 2003.\par
H.N. Van Niekerk. The cost of predation on small livestock in South 
Africa by medium-sized predators. Master's thesis, University of the 
Free State, November 2010.\par
}
